# Ada Lovelace

<portrait of Ada>

Augusta Ada King-Noel, Countess of Lovelace (née Byron; 10 December 1815
– 27 November 1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly
known for her work on Charles Babbage's proposed mechanical
general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. She was the first to
recognise that the machine had applications beyond pure calculation, and created the first algorithm intended to be carried out by such a machine. As a result, she is often regarded as the first to recognise
the full potential of a "computing machine" and the first computer
programmer.

<a smaller image of the Analytical Engine>

### Early life

Ada Lovelace was the only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron, and
his wife Anne Isabella Milbanke ("Annabella"), Lady Wentworth. Her mother remained bitter towards Lord Byron and promoted Ada's interest in mathematics and logic in an effort to prevent her from developing what she saw as the insanity seen in her father, but Ada remained interested in him despite this (and was, upon her eventual death, buried next to him at her request). Often ill, she spent most of her childhood sick.

When she was a teenager, her mathematical talents led her to a long
working relationship and friendship with fellow British mathematician
Charles Babbage, also known as "the father of computers", and in
particular, Babbage's work on the Analytical Engine. Lovelace first met
him in June 1833, through their mutual friend, and her private tutor,
Mary Somerville. Between 1842 and 1843, Ada translated an article by
Italian military engineer Luigi Menabrea on the engine, which she
supplemented with an elaborate set of notes, simply called Notes. These
notes contain what many consider to be the first computer program—that
is, an algorithm designed to be carried out by a machine.


### Education

Throughout her illnesses, she continued her education.[39] Her mother's
obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused
Byron was one of the reasons that Ada was taught mathematics from an
early age. She was privately schooled in mathematics and science by
William Frend, William King,[a] and Mary Somerville, the noted
researcher and scientific author of the 19th century.

One of her later tutors was the mathematician and logician Augustus De Morgan. From 1832, when she was seventeen, her mathematical abilities began to emerge,
and her interest in mathematics dominated the majority of her adult life. In a letter to Lady Byron, De Morgan suggested that her daughter's skill in mathematics could lead her to become "an original mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence".

Lovelace often questioned basic assumptions by integrating poetry and
science. While studying differential calculus, she wrote to De Morgan:

> I may remark that the curious transformations many formulae can
> undergo, the unsuspected and to a beginner apparently impossible
> identity of forms exceedingly dissimilar at first sight, is I think
> one of the chief difficulties in the early part of mathematical
> studies. I am often reminded of certain sprites and fairies one reads
> of, who are at one's elbows in one shape now, and the next minute in a
> form most dissimilar[41]

Lovelace believed that intuition and imagination were critical to
effectively applying mathematical and scientific concepts. She valued
metaphysics as much as mathematics, viewing both as tools for exploring
"the unseen worlds around us".[42]

### The Analytical Engine

<a smaller image of the Analytical Engine>

Work During a nine-month period in 1842–43, Lovelace translated the
Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's article on Babbage's newest
proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended
a set of notes.[55] Explaining the Analytical Engine's function was a
difficult task, as even many other scientists did not really grasp the
concept and the British establishment was uninterested in it.[56]
Lovelace's notes even had to explain how the Analytical Engine differed
from the original Difference Engine.[57] Her work was well received at
the time; the scientist Michael Faraday described himself as a supporter
of her writing.[58]

The notes are around three times longer than the article itself and
include (in Section G[59]), in complete detail, a method for calculating
a sequence of Bernoulli numbers with the Engine, which could have run
correctly had the Analytical Engine been built[60] (only his Difference
Engine has been built, completed in London in 2002[61]). Based on this
work Lovelace is now widely considered the first computer programmer[1]
and her method is recognised as the world's first computer program.[62]

Section G also contains Lovelace's dismissal of artificial intelligence.
She wrote that "The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to
originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to
perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating any
analytical relations or truths." This objection has been the subject of
much debate and rebuttal, for example by Alan Turing in his paper
"Computing Machinery and Intelligence".[63]

First computer program In 1840, Babbage was invited to give a seminar at
the University of Turin about his Analytical Engine. Luigi Menabrea, a
young Italian engineer, and the future Prime Minister of Italy wrote up
Babbage's lecture in French, and this transcript was subsequently
published in the Bibliothèque universelle de Genève in October 1842.
Babbage's friend Charles Wheatstone commissioned Ada Lovelace to
translate Menabrea's paper into English. She then augmented the paper
with notes, which were added to the translation. Ada Lovelace spent the
better part of a year doing this, assisted with input from Babbage.
These notes, which are more extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then
published in Taylor's Scientific Memoirs under the initialism AAL.

Ada Lovelace's notes were labelled alphabetically from A to G. In note
G, she describes an algorithm for the Analytical Engine to compute
Bernoulli numbers. It is considered the first published algorithm ever
specifically tailored for implementation on a computer, and Ada Lovelace
has often been cited as the first computer programmer for this
reason.[65][66] The engine was never completed so her program was never
tested.[67]

In 1953, more than a century after her death, Ada Lovelace's notes on
Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished. The engine has now been
recognised as an early model for a computer and her notes as a
description of a computer and software

### Beyond numbers

Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of computers. She also
developed a vision of the capability of computers to go beyond mere
calculating or number-crunching, while many others, including Babbage
himself, focused only on those capabilities.[8] Her mindset of "poetical
science" led her to ask questions about the Analytical Engine (as shown
in her notes) examining how individuals and society relate to technology
as a collaborative tool.[5]

According to the historian of computing and Babbage specialist Doron
Swade:

> Ada saw something that Babbage in some sense failed to see. In
> Babbage's world his engines were bound by number...What Lovelace saw –
> what Ada Byron saw—was that number could represent entities other than
> quantity. So once you had a machine for manipulating numbers, if those
> numbers represented other things, letters, musical notes, then the
> machine could manipulate symbols of which number was one instance,
> according to rules. It is this fundamental transition from a machine
> which is a number cruncher to a machine for manipulating symbols
> according to rules that is the fundamental transition from calculation
> to computation–to general-purpose computation – and looking back from
> the present high ground of modern computing, if we are looking and
> sifting history for that transition, then that transition was made
> explicitly by Ada in that 1843 paper.[1]

### Commemoration

#### Ada, the computer language

The computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States
Department of Defense, was named after Lovelace. The reference manual
for the language was approved on 10 December 1980 and the Department of
Defense Military Standard for the language, MIL-STD-1815, was given the
number of the year of her birth.

#### Lovelace Medal

Since 1998 the British Computer Society (BCS) has awarded the Lovelace
Medal,[92] and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women
students.[93] BCSWomen sponsors the Lovelace Colloquium, an annual
conference for women undergraduates.[93] Ada College is a
further-education college in Tottenham Hale, London focused on digital
skills.[94]

#### Ada Lovelace Day

Ada Lovelace Day is an annual event celebrated in mid-October[95] whose
goal is to "... raise the profile of women in science, technology,
engineering, and maths," (see Women in STEM fields) and to "create new
role models for girls and women" in these fields. The Ada Initiative was
a non-profit organisation dedicated to increasing the involvement of
women in the free culture and open source movements.[96]

#### Ada Byron Building

The Engineering in Computer Science and Telecommunications College
building in Zaragoza University is called the Ada Byron Building.[97]
The computer centre in the village of Porlock, near where Lovelace
lived, is named after her. Ada Lovelace House is a council-owned
building in Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, near where Lovelace
spent her infancy; the building was once an internet centre[98]

#### Tunnel Boring Machine

One of the tunnel boring machines excavating London's Crossrail project
is named Ada.[99]

#### Ada, the academic journal

A Journal of Gender, New Media, and Technology is an "open-access,
multi-modal, [open-]peer-reviewed feminist journal concerned with the
intersections of gender, new media, and technology" that began in 2012
and is run by the Fembot Collective.[100]

#### [Ada Developers Academy](https://adadevelopersacademy.org/about)

This programming academy is established to fill the unmet need and to
help rectify the gender imbalance in software development, Washington
needs a software development academy that prepares underrepresented
people for productive roles in technical positions. Ada Developers
Academy is the solution.

Inclusivity Ada Developers Academy is designed to be an inclusive,
positive learning environment. Everyone is welcome, regardless of sexual
orientation, disability, physical appearance, education, age, race, or
religion. All women (cis and trans) and people with non-binary gender
who feel a part of women's community are encouraged to apply.

* * * * *

*Citation*
1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace
2. https://adadevelopersacademy.org/about
